.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 llmrb
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for
.\" any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd June 5, 2026
.Dt ROBERT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm robert
.Nd AI assistant for FreeBSD
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl dhv
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an AI assistant for FreeBSD that answers questions using official
man pages, documentation, and
the local ports tree.
It runs in the terminal and is distributed as a standalone, 3MB binary
with no Node.js, Electron, or browser dependency.
.Pp
It uses
.Ev DEEPSEEK_SECRET
to authenticate with the model provider, and answers questions by
searching man pages, the filesystem, and ports metadata.
Answers are grounded in cited excerpts from official documentation, not
model training data.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl d
Enable debug logging.
.It Fl h
Show usage information and exit.
.It Fl v
Print the version of
.Nm
and exit.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width DEEPSEEK_SECRET
.It Ev DEEPSEEK_SECRET
The API key used to authenticate with the model provider.
.It Ev PORTSDIR
The local ports tree used by the
.Ic find-port
and
.Ic read-port
tools.
Defaults to
.Pa /usr/ports .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/man -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/man
The manual page database used by
.Nm
to search for and read man pages.
.It Pa /usr/ports
The default ports tree used by
.Nm
to search for and read port metadata.
.El
.Sh TOOLS
The following tools are available to the assistant:
.Bl -tag -width "find-port"
.It Ic man-page
Read a manual page by name and optional section.
.It Ic man-search
Search the manual page database using
.Xr apropos 1 .
.It Ic read-file
Read a text file from the filesystem.
This tool requires confirmation before execution.
.It Ic find
Search for files and directories from a root path.
This tool requires confirmation before execution.
.It Ic grep
Search for text across files below a root path.
This tool requires confirmation before execution.
.It Ic find-port
Search a local ports tree for a port name.
.It Ic read-port
Read a port's
.Pa Makefile ,
.Pa pkg-descr ,
and
.Pa distinfo .
.It Ic version
Report the
.Nm
version number.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr man 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An 0x1eef <0x1eef@hardenedbsd.org>
